In this video we'll be giving a running
time analysis of the merge sort algorithm.
In particular, we'll be substantiating
the claim that the recursive divide and
conquer merge sort algorithm is better,
has better performance than simple
sorting algorithms that you might know,
like insertion sort,
selection sort and bubble sort.
So in particular,
the goal of this lecture will be to,
mathematically argue the following claim,
from an earlier video.
That, in order to sort
an array of n numbers,
the merge sort algorithm needs no more
than a constant times n log in operations.
That's the maximum number of lines
of code it will ever execute.
Specifically 6 times n
log n + 6n operations.
So how are we going to prove this claim?
We're going to use what is
called a recursion tree method.
The idea of the recursion tree method is
to write out all over the work done by
the recursive merge sort algorithm in
a tree structure with the children
of a given node corresponding to
the recursive calls made by that node.
The point of this tree structure is it
will facilitate a interesting way to count
up the overall work done by the algorithm
and will greatly facilitate the analysis.
So specifically what is this tree?
So at level zero we have a root.
And this corresponds to the outer
call of merge sort, okay so
I'm going to call this level zero.
Now, this tree is going to be binary
in recognition of the fact that
each invocation of MergeSort
makes two recursive calls.
So the two children will correspond to
the two recursive calls of MergeSort.
So, at the root we operate on the entire
input array, so let me draw a big
array indicating that, and at level one we
have one sub problem for the left half and
another sub problem for
the right half of the input array.
And I'll call these first two
recursive calls level one.
Now, of course, each of these two
level one recursive calls will
themselves make two recursive calls.
Each operating on then a quarter
of the original input array.
So those are level two recursive
calls of which there are four.
And this process will continue until
eventually the recursion bottoms out
in base cases when there's only
an array of size zero or one.
So now I have a question for you which
I'll give you in the form of a quiz.
Which is at the bottom of this recursion
tree corresponding to the base cases,
what is the level number at the bottom?
So at what level do the leaves
in this tree reside?
Okay, so hopefully you guessed, correctly
guessed that the answer is the second one.
So namely that the number of levels of the
recursion tree is essentially logarithmic
in the size of the input array.
The reason is basically
that the input size is
being decreased by a factor two
with each level of the recursion.
If you have an input size of n at the
outer level, then each of the first set of
recursive calls operates on
a array of size n over 2.
At level two, each array has size n over 4
and so on, whereas if the recursion bottom
out, well, down at the base cases,
where there's no more recursion,
which is where the input
array has size one or less.
So in other words, the number of levels
of recursion is exactly the number of
times you need to divide n by 2, until
you get down to a number that's most one.
And recall, that's exactly the definition
of a logarithm base 2 of n.
So since the first level is level zero and
the last level is level log base 2 of n.
The total number of levels is
actually log base 2 of n plus 1.
And when I write down this expression I'm
here assuming that n is a power of 2 which
is not a big deal.
I mean the analysis is usually extended
to the case where n is not a power of 2.
But this way we don't have to think
about fractions log base 2 of n
then is an integer.
Okay, so
let's return to the recursion tree, and
let me just redraw it really quick.
So again, down here at the bottom
of the tree, we have the leaves.
And i.e., the base cases,
where there's no more recursion.
Which, when n is a power of 2, correspond
exactly to single element arrays.
So that's the recursion tree corresponding
to an invocation of MergeSort.
And the motivation for writing down, for
organizing the work performed by MergeSort
in this way, is it allows us to
count up the work level by level.
And we'll see that's a particularly
convenient way to account for
all of the different lines
of code that get executed.
Now to see that in more detail, I need to
ask you identify a particular pattern.
So first of all, the first question is,
at a given level j of this recursion,
exactly how many distinct sub problems
are there as a function of the level j.
That's the first question.
The second question is, for
each of those distinct sub problems
at level j, what is the input size.
So what is the size of the array
which is passed to a subproblem
residing at level j of
this recursion tree?
So the correct answer is the third one.
So first of all at a given level j,
there's precisely 2 to
the j distinct subproblems.
There is one outermost
subproblem at level zero.
It has two recursive calls.
Those are the subproblems at level one,
and so on.
In general,
since MergeSort calls itself twice,
the number of subproblems
is doubling each level, so
that gives us the expression 2 to the j
for the number of subproblems at level j.
On the other hand via a similar argument
the input size is halving each time
with each recursive call you pass at
half of the input that you were given.
So at each level of the recursion tree
we're seeing half of the input
size of the previous level.
So after j levels since we started
with an input size n after j levels
each subproblem will be operating on
an array of length n over 2 the j.
Okay so
now let's put this pattern to use, and
actually count up all of the lines
of code, and thenMergeSort executes.
And as I said before, the key idea is
to count up the work level by level.
Now to be clear, when I talk about
the amount of work done at level j.
What I'm talking about is the work done by
those 2 to the j invocations of MergeSort
not counting their
respective recursive calls,
not counting work which is going to get
done in the recursion lower in the tree.
Now recall merge sort is a very simple
algorithm, it just three lines of code,
first there's a recursive call so
we're not counting that, second,
there's another recursive call.
Again, we're not counting that at level j.
And then third,
we just invoke the merge subroutine.
So really outside the recursive
cause all that MergeSort
does is a single indication of merge.
Further, recall we already have a good
understanding of the number of lines of
code that merge needs.
On an input of size m, it's going to
use at most 6m lines of code.
That's an analysis that we
did in the previous video.
So let's fix a level j.
We know how many subproblems there are,
2 to the j.
We know the size of each subproblem,
n over 2 to the j.
And we know how much work
merge needs on such an input.
We just multiply by 6.
And then we just multiply it out.
And we get the amount of
work done at a level j.
Okay at all of the little j subproblems,
so here it is in more detail.
All right so, we start with just the
number of different subproblems at level j
and we just noticed that
that was at most 2 to the j.
We also observed that each
level j subproblem is past
an array as input which has
length n over 2 to the j.
And we know that the merge subroutine,
when given an array of size
n over 2 to the j, will execute at most 6
times that many number of lines of code.
So to compute the total amount
of work done at level j,
we just multiply the number of problems
times the work done per subproblem.
And then something sort
of remarkable happens.
We get this cancellation of the two 2
to the j's and we get an upper bound
6n which is independent of the level j.
So we do at most 6n
operations at the root.
We do at most 6n operations of level one,
at level two, and so on okay.
It's independent of the level.
Morally, the reason this is happening
because of a perfect equilibrium between
two competing forces.
First of all,
the number of subproblems is doubling
with each level of the recursion tree.
But secondly, the amount of work that we
do per subproblem is halving with each
level of the recursion trees.
And so those two cancel out.
We get an upperbound 6n,
which is independent of the level j.
Now, here's why that's so
cool, right, we don't really care about
the amount of work just at a given level.
We care about the amount of work that
MergeSort does ever at any level.
But if we have a bound on the amount of
work at a level which is independent of
the level,
then our overall bound is really easy.
What do we do?
We just take the number of levels.
And we know what that is.
It's exactly log base 2 of n + 1.
Remember, the levels are zero
through log base 2 of n inclusive.
And then we have an upper bound 6n for
each of those log n plus 1 levels.
So, if we expand out this quantity, we get
exactly the upper bound that was claimed
earlier, namely that the number
of operations MergeSort executes
is at most 6n times log
based 2 of n plus 6n.
So that my friends, is a running time
analysis of the merge sort algorithm.
That's why its running time is
bounded by a constant times nlogn,
which especially has n grows large,
it is far superior to the more simple
iterative algorithms like insertion or
selection sort.